bus_riders_app/README.md, before:

# Welcome to your Expo app 👋

This is an [Expo](https://expo.dev) project created with [`create-expo-app`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/create-expo-app).

## Get started

1. Install dependencies

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

2. Start the app

   ```bash
   npx expo start
   ```

In the output, you'll find options to open the app in a

- [development build](https://docs.expo.dev/develop/development-builds/introduction/)
- [Android emulator](https://docs.expo.dev/workflow/android-studio-emulator/)
- [iOS simulator](https://docs.expo.dev/workflow/ios-simulator/)
- [Expo Go](https://expo.dev/go), a limited sandbox for trying out app development with Expo

You can start developing by editing the files inside the **app** directory. This project uses [file-based routing](https://docs.expo.dev/router/introduction).

## Get a fresh project

When you're ready, run:

```bash
npm run reset-project
```

This command will move the starter code to the **app-example** directory and create a blank **app** directory where you can start developing.

## Learn more

To learn more about developing your project with Expo, look at the following resources:

- [Expo documentation](https://docs.expo.dev/): Learn fundamentals, or go into advanced topics with our [guides](https://docs.expo.dev/guides).
- [Learn Expo tutorial](https://docs.expo.dev/tutorial/introduction/): Follow a step-by-step tutorial where you'll create a project that runs on Android, iOS, and the web.

## Join the community

Join our community of developers creating universal apps.

- [Expo on GitHub](https://github.com/expo/expo): View our open source platform and contribute.
- [Discord community](https://chat.expo.dev): Chat with Expo users and ask questions.

Commit message:

Implement WebSocket client hook with JWT
Implement WebSocket client hook with JWT auth (connect + reconnect).
Subscribe to route:{routeId}:{direction} from selected route.
Render live buses in tracking.tsx (it is still a placeholder now).
Add stale-state refresh on reconnect.

bus_riders_app/README.md, after:

# Welcome to your Expo app 👋

This is an [Expo](https://expo.dev) project created with [`create-expo-app`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/create-expo-app).

## Get started

1. Install dependencies

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

2. Start the app

   ```bash
   npx expo start
   ```

3. Configure runtime endpoints (optional but recommended)

   ```bash
   EXPO_PUBLIC_API_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8080/api/v1
   EXPO_PUBLIC_MQTT_BROKER_URL=wss://localhost:8084/mqtt
   EXPO_PUBLIC_MQTT_PUBLISH_INTERVAL_MS=3000
   ```

In the output, you'll find options to open the app in a

- [development build](https://docs.expo.dev/develop/development-builds/introduction/)
- [Android emulator](https://docs.expo.dev/workflow/android-studio-emulator/)
- [iOS simulator](https://docs.expo.dev/workflow/ios-simulator/)
- [Expo Go](https://expo.dev/go), a limited sandbox for trying out app development with Expo

You can start developing by editing the files inside the **app** directory. This project uses [file-based routing](https://docs.expo.dev/router/introduction).

### Bus Tracking Notes

- Bus registration route selection is loaded from backend catalog endpoint `GET /api/v1/bus/routes`.
- GPS publish cadence is throttled to a `2-5s` interval (default `3000ms`).
- MQTT broker and API base URL can be configured via `EXPO_PUBLIC_*` vars or `app.json -> expo.extra`.

## Get a fresh project

When you're ready, run:

```bash
npm run reset-project
```

This command will move the starter code to the **app-example** directory and create a blank **app** directory where you can start developing.

## Learn more

To learn more about developing your project with Expo, look at the following resources:

- [Expo documentation](https://docs.expo.dev/): Learn fundamentals, or go into advanced topics with our [guides](https://docs.expo.dev/guides).
- [Learn Expo tutorial](https://docs.expo.dev/tutorial/introduction/): Follow a step-by-step tutorial where you'll create a project that runs on Android, iOS, and the web.

## Join the community

Join our community of developers creating universal apps.

- [Expo on GitHub](https://github.com/expo/expo): View our open source platform and contribute.
- [Discord community](https://chat.expo.dev): Chat with Expo users and ask questions.
