bus_riders_mqtt/README.md, before:

# bus_riders_mqtt

MQTT ingestion service that connects to a broker (using mqtt.js), validates GPS messages, map-matches progress, and writes state into KeyDB for realtime consumers.

## Requirements

- Node.js 18+
- MQTT broker
- KeyDB (or Redis-compatible) server

## Setup

```bash
npm install
cp .env.example .env
npm run dev
```

Replay arrival/off-track transitions with synthetic noisy GPS:

```bash
npm run replay:arrival
```

If you run outside Docker, override KeyDB host:

```bash
KEYDB_URL=redis://127.0.0.1:6379 npm run replay:arrival
```

## Topic Design

GPS publish topic:

```
gps/{routeId}/{direction}/{busId}
```

Examples:

```
gps/R12/FORWARD/BUS_500
gps/R12/BACKWARD/BUS_732
```

Direction must be `FORWARD` or `BACKWARD`. Wildcards are rejected.

## Payload

```json
{
  "lat": 8.9824,
  "lng": -79.5199,
  "speed": 54,
  "heading": 92,
  "timestamp": 1706184200000
}
```

## Processing Pipeline

MQTT -> GPS ingestion -> Normalized event -> Realtime processor -> KeyDB -> WebSocket pub/sub

## Environment

- `MQTT_HOST`: Broker host (fallback for `MQTT_BROKER_URL`)
- `MQTT_PORT`: Broker port (fallback for `MQTT_BROKER_URL`)
- `MQTT_BROKER_URL`: Full broker URL (e.g. `mqtt://host:1883`)
- `MQTT_CLIENT_ID`: Client ID used by the ingestion service
- `MQTT_USERNAME`: Broker username (optional)
- `MQTT_PASSWORD`: Broker password or token (optional)
- `MQTT_SUBSCRIBE_TOPIC`: Topic filter (default `gps/+/+/+`)
- `MQTT_SUBSCRIBE_QOS`: Subscribe QoS (default `0`)
- `MQTT_KEEPALIVE`: Keepalive seconds (default `60`)
- `MQTT_RECONNECT_PERIOD_MS`: Reconnect delay in ms (default `1000`)
- `KEYDB_URL`: KeyDB connection URL
- `KEYDB_CLIENT_NAME`: Optional client name in KeyDB
- `KEYDB_MESSAGE_HISTORY`: Max message entries per bus list
- `KEYDB_MESSAGE_TTL_SECONDS`: TTL for message keys (0 disables)
- `BUS_STATE_TTL_SECONDS`: TTL for bus state hashes (default `15`)
- `ROUTE_CACHE_TTL_MS`: Cache TTL for route shapes (default `300000`)
- `OFFTRACK_DISTANCE_THRESHOLD_METERS`: Enter off-track threshold in meters (default `50`)
- `OFFTRACK_RECOVERY_THRESHOLD_METERS`: Recover from off-track threshold in meters (default `35`)
- `ARRIVAL_PROGRESS_THRESHOLD`: Minimum progress for arrival gate (default `0.97`)
- `ARRIVAL_DWELL_MS`: Required dwell inside arrival gate before `ARRIVED` (default `10000`)
- `ARRIVAL_MAX_SPEED_KMH`: Maximum speed to allow arrival transition (default `8`)
- `ARRIVAL_RESET_PROGRESS_THRESHOLD`: Progress threshold to reset `ARRIVED` for a new cycle (default `0.2`)
- `ARRIVAL_EXIT_GRACE_MS`: Grace period outside arrival gate before resetting to `IN_ROUTE` (default `10000`)

## Route Geometry (optional)

If `route:shape:{routeId}:{direction}` is present in KeyDB, it should be a JSON array of points:

```
[[8.9824, -79.5199], [8.9830, -79.5203]]
```

or:

```
[{"lat": 8.9824, "lng": -79.5199}, {"lat": 8.9830, "lng": -79.5203}]
```

When present, the service map-matches GPS updates to compute `progress` (0-1). If missing, progress defaults to `0`.
If you store `route:length:{routeId}:{direction}` (meters), neighbor distance/ETA estimates use that value when no shape exists.

If `route:endzone:{routeId}:{direction}` is present, arrival detection uses it as a terminal polygon geofence.

## Stored Keys

- `mqtt:messages:{busId}`: List of recent messages per bus
- `mqtt:last:{busId}:{topic}`: Last message per bus/topic
- `route:{routeId}:{direction}`: Sorted set of bus progress by route
- `bus:{busId}`: Hash of last known bus state (`progress`, `deviationMeters`, `isOffTrack`, `tripStatus`, `arrivalTimestamp`, ...)
- `ws:bus:{busId}`: Pub/sub channel for bus updates
- `ws:route:{routeId}:{direction}`: Pub/sub channel for route updates

Commit message:

Implemented and continued with a reliability-focused slice, then updated the MVP checklist

bus_riders_mqtt/README.md, after:

# bus_riders_mqtt

MQTT ingestion service that connects to a broker (using mqtt.js), validates GPS messages, map-matches progress, and writes state into KeyDB for realtime consumers.

## Requirements

- Node.js 18+
- MQTT broker
- KeyDB (or Redis-compatible) server

## Setup

```bash
npm install
cp .env.example .env
npm run dev
```

Replay arrival/off-track transitions with synthetic noisy GPS:

```bash
npm run replay:arrival
```

If you run outside Docker, override KeyDB host:

```bash
KEYDB_URL=redis://127.0.0.1:6379 npm run replay:arrival
```

## Topic Design

GPS publish topic:

```
gps/{routeId}/{direction}/{busId}
```

Examples:

```
gps/R12/FORWARD/BUS_500
gps/R12/BACKWARD/BUS_732
```

Direction must be `FORWARD` or `BACKWARD`. Wildcards are rejected.

## Payload

```json
{
  "lat": 8.9824,
  "lng": -79.5199,
  "speed": 54,
  "heading": 92,
  "timestamp": 1706184200000
}
```

## Processing Pipeline

MQTT -> GPS ingestion -> Normalized event -> Realtime processor -> KeyDB -> WebSocket pub/sub

Rejected messages are dropped and logged with reason codes:
`invalid_topic`, `invalid_payload`, `stale_timestamp`, `projection_error`, `missing_route_shape`.

## Environment

- `MQTT_HOST`: Broker host (fallback for `MQTT_BROKER_URL`)
- `MQTT_PORT`: Broker port (fallback for `MQTT_BROKER_URL`)
- `MQTT_BROKER_URL`: Full broker URL (e.g. `mqtt://host:1883`)
- `MQTT_CLIENT_ID`: Client ID used by the ingestion service
- `MQTT_USERNAME`: Broker username (optional)
- `MQTT_PASSWORD`: Broker password or token (optional)
- `MQTT_SUBSCRIBE_TOPIC`: Topic filter (default `gps/+/+/+`)
- `MQTT_SUBSCRIBE_QOS`: Subscribe QoS (default `0`)
- `MQTT_KEEPALIVE`: Keepalive seconds (default `60`)
- `MQTT_RECONNECT_PERIOD_MS`: Reconnect delay in ms (default `1000`)
- `KEYDB_URL`: KeyDB connection URL
- `KEYDB_CLIENT_NAME`: Optional client name in KeyDB
- `KEYDB_MESSAGE_HISTORY`: Max message entries per bus list
- `KEYDB_MESSAGE_TTL_SECONDS`: TTL for message keys (0 disables)
- `BUS_STATE_TTL_SECONDS`: TTL for bus state hashes (default `15`)
- `ROUTE_CACHE_TTL_MS`: Cache TTL for route shapes (default `300000`)
- `OFFTRACK_DISTANCE_THRESHOLD_METERS`: Enter off-track threshold in meters (default `50`)
- `OFFTRACK_RECOVERY_THRESHOLD_METERS`: Recover from off-track threshold in meters (default `35`)
- `ARRIVAL_PROGRESS_THRESHOLD`: Minimum progress for arrival gate (default `0.97`)
- `ARRIVAL_DWELL_MS`: Required dwell inside arrival gate before `ARRIVED` (default `10000`)
- `ARRIVAL_MAX_SPEED_KMH`: Maximum speed to allow arrival transition (default `8`)
- `ARRIVAL_RESET_PROGRESS_THRESHOLD`: Progress threshold to reset `ARRIVED` for a new cycle (default `0.2`)
- `ARRIVAL_EXIT_GRACE_MS`: Grace period outside arrival gate before resetting to `IN_ROUTE` (default `10000`)
- `STALE_TIMESTAMP_MAX_AGE_MS`: Reject GPS samples older than this many ms (default `30000`)
- `STALE_TIMESTAMP_MAX_FUTURE_DRIFT_MS`: Reject GPS samples too far in the future (default `5000`)

## Route Geometry (optional)

If `route:shape:{routeId}:{direction}` is present in KeyDB, it should be a JSON array of points:

```
[[8.9824, -79.5199], [8.9830, -79.5203]]
```

or:

```
[{"lat": 8.9824, "lng": -79.5199}, {"lat": 8.9830, "lng": -79.5203}]
```

When present, the service map-matches GPS updates to compute `progress` (0-1). If missing, the GPS sample is rejected with `missing_route_shape`.
If you store `route:length:{routeId}:{direction}` (meters), neighbor distance/ETA estimates use that value when no shape exists.

If `route:endzone:{routeId}:{direction}` is present, arrival detection uses it as a terminal polygon geofence.

## Stored Keys

- `mqtt:messages:{busId}`: List of recent messages per bus
- `mqtt:last:{busId}:{topic}`: Last message per bus/topic
- `route:{routeId}:{direction}`: Sorted set of bus progress by route
- `bus:{busId}`: Hash of last known bus state (`progress`, `deviationMeters`, `isOffTrack`, `tripStatus`, `arrivalTimestamp`, ...)
- `ws:bus:{busId}`: Pub/sub channel for bus updates
- `ws:route:{routeId}:{direction}`: Pub/sub channel for route updates
